docs/masteroutline.md, before:

#master list of content

##About the project
- need
- goals
- data portals

##Getting Started
- data deposit guide - signature and responsibilities
- organized as publishing "classes"
- training
- logo
- description (include url)
- department list

##Privacy
- what to know about it - harm
- What to publish, and what not to publish (protected data, contracts, etc)
- what to know about data management
- internal review
- Data Center review
- when to contact us
- breach response plan

##Establishing publication priorities
- examine requests
- benefits of sharing
- update frequency


##Preparing data
- preferred tabular formats (csv, json)
- accepted formats
- formatting tabular data
- avoid unstructured/memo fields
- avoid blank rows
- legal review

##publishing on CKAN
- accounts and roles
- staff roles
- organizations
- datasets and resources defined
- manual upload
- creating views
- add data to groups
- Data Center review (do not make public)
- permanence

##metadata
- what it is
- why it is important
- schema
- how-to complete
- creating a data dictionary and other documentation (user guides) vs. what goes into data notes

##Moderating comments
- creating accounts on DISQUS
- logging in
- moderating

##ETL
- What is it?
- Why does it matter?
- questionnaire

##Data Catalogs

##Staff transition
- notify WPRDC
- change account roles

Commit message:

add data dictionary to outline

docs/masteroutline.md, after:

#master list of content

##About the project
- need
- goals
- data portals

##Getting Started
- data deposit guide - signature and responsibilities
- organized as publishing "classes"
- training
- logo
- description (include url)
- department list

##Privacy
- what to know about it - harm
- What to publish, and what not to publish (protected data, contracts, etc)
- what to know about data management
- internal review
- Data Center review
- when to contact us
- breach response plan

##Establishing publication priorities
- examine requests
- benefits of sharing
- update frequency


##Preparing data
- preferred tabular formats (csv, json)
- accepted formats
- formatting tabular data
- avoid unstructured/memo fields
- avoid blank rows
- legal review

##Creating a data dictionary
- what are data dictionaries
- why are they important
- suggested formats
- how to create (spreadsheet)

##publishing on CKAN
- accounts and roles
- staff roles
- organizations
- datasets and resources defined
- manual upload
- creating views
- add data to groups
- Data Center review (do not make public)
- permanence

##metadata
- what it is
- why it is important
- schema
- how-to complete
- creating a data dictionary and other documentation (user guides) vs. what goes into data notes

##Moderating comments
- creating accounts on DISQUS
- logging in
- moderating

##ETL
- What is it?
- Why does it matter?
- questionnaire

##Data Catalogs

##Staff transition
- notify WPRDC
- change account roles
